And Barbados, British West Indies. Donald
Ouellette, interviewing Art Shields, January
1st, 1983, in New York City. Mr. Shields, when and
where were you born? Well, I just told you. Maybe it
wasn't recorded. Barbados, British West Indies,
October 31, 19... Oh, 1888. Yes. And when did you
immigrate to the United States? Well, I didn't
immigrate. My parents were American citizens. We
moved to another island, and I came to the States in
93.
in 1893. When was the first time that you became
interested in journalism? That again is gone into
quite fully in the book.
I was working as a full-time reporter for several
months in 1909 on a little daily paper in a steel
town in Ohio, Dover, Ohio, a U.S. steel town. And
then the paper folded and I went back to college.
That's all in the book. I have a whole chapter in
that first year, first journalism
When did you become involved with the Daily
Worker? Well, when it started in 1924. And what was
your position then? Reporter. And what was your
beat? Well, the
beat was a very small staff. The beat was all
Chicago.
In your earlier years, you knew John Reed? Well, I
say I told you before I met him. Oh, no, that wasn't
recorded. I met him and talked with him, but I knew
his work better than I knew him personally.
I heard him speak quite a number of times and, of
course, read what he wrote.
starting in
Seattle, even before that. No, I began reading
John Reed in 1913,
his article in the Masses on the Silk Strike in
Paterson, New Jersey. It's a fascinating It can be
found in a book called The Education of John Reed,
which is a compilation of a lot of these articles
published by International.
And I heard him lecture two
or three times before the World War. And, of
course, I read the masses and read his articles. He
was one of the editors.
When did you know Big Bill Hayward? Well, yes, I
knew Bill, I wouldn't say intimately, but I met him
several times and went to his meetings. I have a
chapter about him, or
partially about him, in the book. It's on this
Patterson Silk Strike of the IWW in 1913. I was a
reporter in New York, not on labor. I was covering
crime then.
But in my free time, because of my interest, I would
run over to Patterson during the strike. And I
heard him speak. Well, I heard him speak at other
times also. He was a tremendous speaker, a
tremendous figure. Did you know, were you
associated in any way with, say, the Molly
Maguires? Well, the Molly Maguires, you'll
flatter me, I'm not quite that old. Did you know
Mother Jones? I knew Mother, I once had a two-hour
talk with Mother Jones, a luncheon, and of course I
followed her work closely, yes. Incidentally,
Philip Foner will have a book on Mother Jones
coming out, The Historian, I suppose you know the
name, in four or five months, maybe earlier. It's a
900-page book. He's collected everything that
Mother Jones has said that was recorded.
And...
Excuse me. When you were
with the Daily Worker, or in the 19-teens, what was
your politics then? And where? Before the war.
Before the war? Yes. What was your personal
politics? Before the First World War? Yes, sir.
Well, before the First World War,
I was left with a...
I was particularly interested in the IWW, but I
didn't join it until just after the war. How long
were you a member in the IWW? Probably three or four
years.
How did you first become interested in maritime
labor? What were your first contacts with the
scene? I was very much interested in labor, per se,
and
particularly labor in the major industries, and
I would say probably most actively since 1916. I
have a chapter in my book about a trip I took in 1916
on a British freighter through the submarine zone
to England, and
I would say that my interest was much more active
after that trip. Did
you ever know Andrew Fursweth? I've heard him
speak. I didn't know him personally, no. Of
course, when I heard him speak, I heard him speak at
an American Federation of Labor convention in
Atlantic City in 1925.
He had become somewhat of a figure of the past. You
see, Furiseth did very good work in his day for the
men on the deck for seamen. He was essentially a
craft unionist and he played quite a part. He came
out of the old sailing ships. He played quite a part
in organizing the sailors union of the Pacific.
Later his union tried to expand and took the title
of the ISU, the International Seaman's Union.
But I think the old man rather lost control then
because there were departments for the engine men
and for the stewards and they were led by
conservatives and
It didn't reflect much credit on him to be
connected with, but he himself was a very honest
man.
What you'd call a good man, I'd say. Senator La
Follette once, the elder La Follette, in the
speech, paid a great tribute to Furiseth. He gives
Furiseth credit for the first real protective
laws for seamen, the seamen's
protection, I think it was called the Seamen's Act
or something like that. La Follette helped
himself put it through in consultation with
yours. That was much earlier. I don't remember the
date anymore. 1915. Yes. But that could be looked
up. But his weakness, in a way, was partly due to the
fact that he was not really an industrial
unionist. And industrial unionism is the thing.
To
fight against these great corporations
controlled by bankers, the old-fashioned craft
union of separate unions for the different
skills, with many of the workers having very
little skill, is obsolete, you see. As a young man,
what
made you want to become involved and become
socially aware? Well, I had a lot of experience
working, and
if you work and go through the hardships. And you
see how helpless a worker is against a giant
corporation. For instance, I worked for U.S.
Steel in this little town where I finally got a job
on the newspaper. And I worked for other big
corporations. You want to do something about it.
And if you're a sympathetic person, You enjoy the
society of the men you're working with. Their
anger and their sufferings impinge on you, too. I
mean, the natural reaction is to do something
about it and get together and struggle.
You said that you... ideologically adhered to the
Wobblies, the IWW, up until a couple of years after
World War I? Well, it was a slow development
there. From the Wobblies, where did you
politically move to? You see, the labor movement
was weak in those days, and
I was feeling my way. There. There wasn't too much
guidance.
And ideologically, which way were you moving?
What's that? Which way were you moving? From the
Wobblies, you ideologically moved where? Next?
Well, I say the Wobblies were industrial
unionists. Perhaps you'd better have something
to eat, if you're thinking. The Wobblies were
industrial unionists, you see. That's what
attracted me. They
had some weaknesses too, of course, which is one
reason why they didn't survive. But
they were great fighters in their day. From the
Wobblies, where did you move on to next? What? From
the Wobblies, where did you move to next
ideologically? I would say, as far
as labor is concerned, somewhat broader,
realizing that
the Wobblies cannot do it all by themselves, that
they're also, even in the craft unions, there were
many good fighters. There were also bureaucrats
and and some traders, but there were many good
fighters in the ranks. And also, in the craft
unions, there was developing a move towards unity
between them. And in others, broadly speaking, it
was a movement towards industrialization,
towards industrial unionism. William J. Foster
played a big part in that. He did a tremendous job,
which you're probably familiar with, in
organizing the packinghouse workers. Do you know
about that? Somewhat, yes. Well, that was in 18,
perhaps starting in 17. He had to work with craft
unions. But what he did was to formed
shop councils, plant councils, of the craft
unions so that there would be a centralized
control there. And it was so effective that they
quickly organized almost the entire
packinghouse industry, 200,000 workers, and got
contracts. Unfortunately, after the war, Foster
was no longer in it because he went next into steel
and other things. But unfortunately, after the
war came a violent attack on all labor by the
employers, by the big interests. The unions were
beaten down. They lost half their membership in
the next few years. But you know, I think you're
familiar with that. Did you cover the maritime
strike of 1920-21? Well, it
continued through the first half of the 20s, this
destruction of the unions. Even the mighty coal
miners' union was on its last legs by 27. Though it
rose again, it came back in a big way a few years
later. You said you became or was employed with the
Daily Worker when it was first founded in 1924. And
how long did you stay with the paper? Well, I was
there less than a year. Then I went to, it became, my
wife and I, took over the New York office of
a trade union news agency called the Federated
Press. It lasted about 20 years, though I was only
with it there for several years. And that was owned
by, organized like the Associated Press on a
cooperative basis. And there are about 100 labor
papers, including a few socialist and communist
papers among them, but most of them trade union
papers. And that gave me the opportunity to travel
widely and
covering big struggles. For instance, I'm now
writing about a chapter
on a you may not have heard of it, the Battle of Blair
Mountain in West Virginia. It was the biggest arms
struggle between labor and trade unionists and
gun thugs in the country's history. Far bigger
than anything else that's ever happened in this
country. What union was? United Mine Workers.
Thousands of men on each side. What was the date on
this? What? When? Twenty-one. Starting at the end
of August and continuing into September, there
was a six-day gun battle with a minimum of 5,000
miners and at least that many gun thugs and state
police were also with them.
The miners were winning. There were a good many
casualties among the gun thugs, not so many among
the miners. And the miners were winning when the
army came in, 2,000
troops in battle gear, and the men didn't attempt
to fight the troops.
As Mother Jones said to me, she was down there, the
troops are the reserve gunmen for the coal
operators. President Harding was President
then.
What were some other labor incidents that you
covered? Well, there was a succession of mine
struggles. A few months later, there was a, let's
see, about three months later, I was in Kansas for
about five weeks. The coal fields there, a big
strike. The president and vice president were
jailed altogether for 18 months, and the miners
struck to free them. Then the next year, I spent
three months in Pennsylvania. There was a
five-month national strike of the miners, the
longest national strike they ever had. And I spent
three months in it. That was quite exciting.
After you helped form this Labor Federated Press,
how long was it until you went back to the Daily
Worker? Well, I didn't go back until 1936. Until
1936. Yes. Before this time, had you ever covered
the waterfront areas as a journalist or as a
reporter? Yes, but not consistently. Just
occasional stories. Because there wasn't very
much, there was activity, some activity among the
longshoremen, but the struggle of the seamen in
the big way didn't begin until the formation of the
Marine Workers Industrial Union, which was, in a
way, the mother of the National Maritime Union. I
suppose you know about that. Right. Did you
personally know Roy Hudson? Yes, I knew Roy
Hudson, yes. He died, as you know. The last month,
yes. Yeah. Did Esther Palazzi give you the latest
issue of that paper, yes. She certainly did, yes.
Yes. Well, that's quite informative
in that. In 1936, you were given the waterfront as
your territory, as a reporter for that? No, not
fully.
Just occasionally. I wasn't the main
correspondent of the waterfront.
I should say 1940, but I was in touch with it, a
fairly close touch. I spent a good deal of time then
in the steel drive, the organizing of the steel
union and other things, yes. Would you like to
elaborate more about the Steel Organizers
Committee?
I suppose you know the story of the CIO. Yeah. It was
first a committee for industrial organizations.
Then it became, in 1938, the name was changed to
Congress of Industrial Organizations. You see,
first it was a committee because it was a committee
set up by... I believe, eight different unions.
And then
it started to
encourage
drives in many industries. The biggest one was in
steel. John L. Lewis played a great historical
role in that. His role historically was very bad in
the 20s. I suppose you know about that. He was
reactionary. Under his leadership, the
union fell to pieces. But
he made a remarkable change. His personality
didn't change, but his tactics changed. As he said
to me, I interviewed him the beginning of January
36,
I
asked him something like this. I said, the United
Mine Workers is now at the peak of its strength.
It's never been so strong as today. Why are you
going into this larger program? And he said in his
booming voice, My motives are not entirely
altruistic, he said. Then he explained that the
miners' union could not survive if it stood alone.
He said the same interests are behind steel and
some other industries as are behind the steel
industry. employers of the coal miners. So it was
necessary to get a very broad front of strong
unions. And he showed real statesmanship. He
realized that the left, particularly the
communists, had great influence, had much
influence, Their organization in steel was not
big, but their men were trusted. Their
representatives were trusted. And he
didn't himself take direct charge of the drive. He
entrusted it in the hands of Philip Murray, vice
president of the miners' union. But he set the
overall policy.
They put a total of about 60 members of the
Communist Party on the payroll.
Not a high payroll, rather low, but enough to live
on with necessary expenses. They weren't the only
organizers, but I would say there were If not the
core of the organizing drive, they were the most
important part of it. And they did the job. They
organized the steel industry. It was necessary to
have a strike in 1937 then. U.S.
Steel, you see, signed up in March 1937.
But the Bethlehem and Immense Steel Republic and
others held out, and a strike was called against
them, which lasted several months. It was not won
officially, but it was such a demonstration of
solidarity that the company signed up. soon after
the one after the other and the major plants with
the exception I think perhaps of National Steel
and a few others were were unionized I made my
headquarters then in Pittsburgh during that
drive and radiated out from there Well, let me ask
you this. You stated earlier that in the 1920s the
organized labor movement declined. Why do you
think it came up again? What were the reasons why
labor expanded in the 30s, in your opinion?
Well, there are a number of reasons.
One was that the
big employers were very greedy, and
they beat workers down, their working class down,
and the workers had all they could take, and all
that was needed was good leadership to advance.
Now, this leadership had begun even before the CIO
drive, here and there, in a number of places. There
were a number
of union groups that started winning strikes, and
a big role was played by a number of left unions such
as the Marine Works Industrial Union, which were
in the main led by communists. I would give them a
great deal of credit in this. And as a matter of
fact, before Lewis acted, a young communist steel
worker, Gus Hall, you know the name, He led a big
delegation of steel workers. He was a steel worker
himself, to Washington to see Lewis. And they told
him that he would get the fullest support if he
would put
the resources of the United Mine Workers behind a
steel drive. Lewis did it. He might have done it
anyhow, but I think that that was probably the
spark plug that started it. Do you feel there were
any other— Hull himself became in
charge of the drive at a rather important town
called Warren, Ohio, near Youngstown, where
there was a big Republic Steel plant. besides this
new leadership, do you think there are any other
reasons why labor expanded in the thirties? Do you
think Roosevelt? Yes, definitely yes. The
political atmosphere was much better for it. You
see, Roosevelt
started out very cautiously. He himself
developed a lot during the first years of his
administration. But in his NRA, National
Recovery Administration,
most of it was not good. It was sort of giving a
charter to to the monopolies to take control. But
there was one little clause headed under the title
7A that
workers had the right to organize, and that must be
recognized. Now Lewis again showed
statesmanship of that in 1933. His
union was almost at the bottom. And his chief
economist, Jet Lauch, he's forgotten now, but he
was once rather important, told me that Lewis bet
his last
quarter of a million dollars in the treasury on an
organizing drive then. And he set organizers all
through the coal fields.
telling them, the government is behind you. He
somewhat exaggerated that. But it was very
effective. The workers were just looking for
leadership, you see. They were in terrible
condition. The misery in the coal fields was
extremely acute. And they swarmed into the
unions. And the United Minebrookers shot up
quickly.
Just before that, you see, there had been a
left-wing miners' union called
the National Miners' Union, also NMU. But
when the United Miner Workers was hardly
functioning at all, they conducted one very big
strike and some smaller ones. They dissolved and
went back into the United Mine Workers Union and
threw their progressive outlook into the locals.
And that went along with Lewis's
drive, his quarter of a million dollar gamble,
which paid off wonderfully well. And that's when I
was so successful that I said to him, your union is
now at the peak of its strength. But he said he was
afraid it wouldn't last unless they organized the
other unions.
The leadership plays a great part there. When
workers are practical, they'll fight if they see a
good chance of winning.
And they were desperate, you see. In 1936 you were
associated with the Daily Worker? Well, at first I
gave all my time to the Sunday Worker, which had
just been started. But after that I worked
for—after a few months I was on general assignment
for the Daily. but concentrating mainly on labor.
When was the first time that you began to associate
with the seamen in the 1930s? You said you first
went to the steel, covered the steel strikes. I did
occasional assignments, you see, there. And I had
friends among the seamen. So I kept, in the
personal way, I kept in touch with it, yes. I knew
what was going on. For instance, I knew some of the
leaders of the Marine Works Industrial Union very
well. There
were some very good men there. Harry Hines, Al
Lannan, Roy I didn't know quite as intimately, but
I knew him and saw him from time to time, and others.
They
worked
on almost an empty stomachs at the early days. It
started, I think, One of the articles on Roy in
Esser's paper, little paper, tells about it.
First was organized a social club. That was
organized by communists, and women played quite a
part in that. But that became the basis of, rather
soon, of the Marine Workers Industrial Union,
which became an effective union of thousands of
members.
Not as big as the NMU itself became, but a very
significant union. When did you begin to cover the
waterfront in more detail? Well, I began giving a
large, not all my time, but I should say a large part
of my time to it. It was part of my beat. I would say in
1940 there.
Did you cover any of the earlier strikes of the NMU
in 36 and 37 or the tankers? Well, I wrote some
stories, but other people were doing more work
there than I did. But I knew about it, you know, and I
was in on it. Why was the Daily Worker so interested
in the National Maritime Union? What was it
interested in? Why did the Daily Worker give the
National Maritime Union so much space? Well, the
Daily Worker is devoted to worker struggles, you
see. And it's a New York paper. It's national also.
But maritime is the biggest and most important
industry in New York. It's heavy industry. It's
big industry, you see. And so they couldn't escape
it to do their job.
By 1940, then, you were covering the National
Maritime Union in the seafront area. What's that?
When was the first time that you met Joe Curran?
I don't remember. I'd met him earlier, but I didn't
have much to do with him. I
saw him frequently, though, after 1940.
What were your impressions of him as a person? Or
what are your impressions of him as a person?
I was sort of open-minded about him. He didn't
overwhelm me at all. And he was the president of the
union, so I
accepted that, or you might say supported him. But
I didn't see him as a thinker, especially. Not that
he wasn't stupid, but he was not creative, I would
say.
He wasn't a man to work out tactics. And I didn't
sense any great commitment on his part to a cause
like, to the cause of the working class. I didn't
realize the real roughness of the man though at the
time, which came out later, you see. When
was the first time that you met Blackie Myers? Oh, I
met Blackie.
I really don't know. Probably in 36. I'm pretty
sure I met him in 36. Curiously, Blackie and I were
in the same strike in 1923, though I didn't know him
then.
It's a chapter that I haven't written yet in my
second volume. San Pedro, which is the port of Los
Angeles, the IWW...
carried out a strike, shut down the port, 99 ships
tied up, shut down the port for about five weeks.
And a complete tie-up. It was suppressed with
police violence. But Blackie was there as a young
seaman, almost a kid. He told me since. But you see,
there was... There were 3,500 seamen and
longshoremen there, striking. Blackie was in
that crowd. So we had those memories together.
What were your personal impressions of Blackie
Myers later, once he died? became an official of
the National American Archive? Well, Blackie was
extremely effective. He had wonderful appeal,
you know. He had charm. He was an excellent
speaker. He
had quite a big role, I'd say.
After the seamen in 36 began their movement to form
the National Maritime Union, how popular did
their cause become in the New York City area? How
popular did their cause become? Well,
it's often been said that the seamen's union this
would go back to the Marine Works Industrial
Union, was not just formed by seamen, but it was
formed also with the help of shoreside
sympathizers. They got a lot of help,
particularly in the Chelsea area, which is the
west side along the docks there. There
were a lot of good people there. labor-conscious
people who came down with literature, invited
seamen into their homes, talked unionism to them
there. But I couldn't answer as to how popular it
was in the city. That's really too broad a
question. Yes. Well, who were some of the groups
then? They got a lot of help from some very good
people, though. Well, particularly Congressman
Mark Antonio, you may have heard of him. Yes. Yes.
He went right to the front for him, did a lot, gave
him a lot of help. And LaGuardia,
first a congressman, and eventually mayor, was
friendly. LaGuardia.
How was, what was the... During this time period
from 1936 until 1940, how did the press handle the
National Maritime Union?
Well, the press generally was—most of them were
anti-Union. They were very cold about it. There
were some exceptions. See, I think the post at that
time, it had a much better ownership and
management as today. Today it's led by, it's owned
by a reactionary Australian named Murdoch.